docs:#524 adding S3 permissions (#809)
redpanda-data/documentation: modules/develop/pages/produce-data/leader-pinning.adoc

= Leader Pinning
:page-categories: Clients, Development
// tag::single-source[]
:description: Learn about leader pinning and how to configure a preferred partition leader based on availability zones.

> Produce requests to Redpanda topics go through the topic partition leader, which then ensure that messages are synced across its follower replicas. For a Redpanda cluster deployed across multiple availability zones (AZs), leader pinning is a mechanism to ensure that a topic's partition leaders are geographically closer to clients. Similar to xref:develop:consume-data/follower-fetching.adoc[follower fetching] for consume requests, leader pinning can lower networking costs and help guarantee lower latency by routing produce requests to brokers located in certain AZs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Produce requests to write data to Redpanda topics go through the topic partition leader, which syncs messages across its follower replicas. For a Redpanda cluster deployed across multiple availability zones (AZs), leader pinning makes sure that a topic's partition leaders are geographically closer to clients. 

Similar to xref:develop:consume-data/follower-fetching.adoc[follower fetching] for consume requests, leader pinning can lower networking costs and help guarantee lower latency by routing produce requests to brokers located in certain AZs.
```

> Produce requests to Redpanda topics go through the topic partition leader, which then ensure that messages are synced across its follower replicas. For a Redpanda cluster deployed across multiple availability zones (AZs), leader pinning is a mechanism to ensure that a topic's partition leaders are geographically closer to clients. Similar to xref:develop:consume-data/follower-fetching.adoc[follower fetching] for consume requests, leader pinning can lower networking costs and help guarantee lower latency by routing produce requests to brokers located in certain AZs.

Reviewer 2: > leader pinning can lower networking costs and help guarantee lower latency by routing produce requests

This also applies to consume requests without follower fetching, maybe we should mention that to avoid confusion.

== Prerequisites

include::shared:partial$enterprise-license.adoc[]

You must xref:manage:rack-awareness.adoc#configure-rack-awareness[configure rack awareness] for the cluster.

== Configure leader pinning

The following steps assume that you have Redpanda deployed in a multi-AZ setup, and you have configured each broker so that the config_ref:rack,true,properties/broker-properties[] configuration property contains rack IDs corresponding to the AZ IDs.

. Set the topic configuration property `redpanda.leaders.preference`. The property accepts the following string values:
+

> ** `none` (default): Opt out the topic explicily from leader pinning.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
** `none` (default): Opt out the topic from leader pinning.
```

> ** `racks:<rack1>[,<rack2>,...]`: Sets the preferred location (rack) of partition leaders to brokers with rack IDs in this list. The list can contain one or more rack IDs. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
** `racks:<rack1>[,<rack2>,...]`: Specify the preferred location (rack) of partition leaders to brokers. The list can contain one or more rack IDs. 
```

+
You can list the IDs in any order. Spaces in the list are ignored, i.e. `racks:rack1,rack2` and `racks: rack1,  rack2` are equivalent, but you cannot specify empty rack IDs, for example, `racks: rack1,,rack2`.

> . Set the cluster configuration property `default_leaders_preference`. This property sets the default leader pinning configuration for all topics that don’t have `redpanda.leaders.preference` explicitly set. It accepts values in the same format as `redpanda.leaders.preference`. Default: `none` 

Reviewer 2: This is rendered as a numbered list that makes this look as a sequence of steps (set topic property, then set cluster config property). In fact there is no sequence and there can be any combination of two options (set one or the other or both). I wonder how we can make this more clear.

Reviewer 2: So the expectation is that the user will set this for individual topics, but if they want, they can set the default to apply to all topics.

+

> This property also affects internal topics such as __consumer_offsets and transaction coordinators.

Reviewer: Should these topic names be in backticks?

Reviewer 3: @asimms41 I'll put consumer offsets in backticks. As for transaction coordinators, I am not certain on the number of topics we have that relate to transaction coordination. Maybe @ztlpn can chime in, but I'll leave that phrase in regular formatting just in case.

Reviewer 2: Yes, the latter phrase shouldn't be in backticks (it's not a topic name).

> NOTE: If the config_ref:enable_rack_awareness,true,properties/cluster-properties[] cluster configuration property is set to `false`, leadership pinning is disabled across the cluster.

Reviewer: Should this note be after the intro to this task so that users can enable this property before starting?

If there is more than one broker in the preferred AZ (or AZs), leader pinning distributes partition leaders uniformly across brokers in the AZ.

== Leader pinning failover across availability zones

> Suppose there are 3 AZs: A, B, and C, and A becomes unavailable. The failover behavior is as follows:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If there are three AZs: A, B, and C, and A becomes unavailable, the failover behavior is as follows:
```

> * A topic with "A" as the preferred leader AZ will have its partition leaders uniformly distributed across B and C.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* A topic with "A" as the preferred leader AZ has its partition leaders uniformly distributed across B and C.
```

> * A topic with "A,B" as the preferred leader AZs will have its partition leaders in B.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* A topic with "A,B" as the preferred leader AZs has its partition leaders in B.
```

> * A topic with “B” as the preferred leader AZ will have its partition leaders in B as well.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* A topic with “B” as the preferred leader AZ will have its partition leaders in B as well.
```
```suggestion
* A topic with “B” as the preferred leader AZ has its partition leaders in B as well.
```
In line with style guide.

Reviewer 3: @asimms41 Yeah, I wasn't too sure about this one. 50/50 on it, but I went with the future tense to try and emphasize the change that happens in the event of a failover (to me, "has its partition leaders" can sound like a description of the current state). WDYT?

Reviewer 4: Great to see this example!

Reviewer: If that is more accurate then I'm happy to go with it.

= Leader Pinning
:page-categories: Clients, Development
// tag::single-source[]
:description: Learn about leader pinning and how to configure a preferred partition leader based on availability zones.

> Produce requests to Redpanda topics go through the topic partition leader, which then ensure that messages are synced across its follower replicas. For a Redpanda cluster deployed across multiple availability zones (AZs), leader pinning is a mechanism to ensure that a topic's partition leaders are geographically closer to clients. Leader pinning can lower networking costs and help guarantee lower latency by routing produce requests and consume requests without xref:develop:consume-data/follower-fetching.adoc[follower fetching] to brokers located in certain AZs.

Reviewer 3: @ztlpn Is the rephrase accurate?

Reviewer 2: Well, if by "consume requests without follower fetching" it means "consume requests without `client.rack` property", then it is correct, but it feels like it is juxtaposing leader pinning and follower fetching, even though they are not exclusive and can be used together.

Maybe we can just say "produce and consume requests", and then mention follower fetching in the following sentence as a related feature that can also reduce networking costs, but only for consume requests (but for consume requests follower fetching is more powerful, as it doesn't require bringing all clients into a single AZ).

Reviewer 4: Right I would just focus on the produce requests.  This is the main point.

= Leader Pinning
:page-categories: Clients, Development
// tag::single-source[]

> :description: Learn about leader pinning and how to configure a preferred partition leader based on availability zones.

Reviewer 4: 'Preferred partition leader location based on cloud availability zones or regions'

Produce requests to Redpanda topics go through the topic partition leader, which then ensure that messages are synced across its follower replicas. For a Redpanda cluster deployed across multiple availability zones (AZs), leader pinning is a mechanism to ensure that a topic's partition leaders are geographically closer to clients. Leader pinning can lower networking costs and help guarantee lower latency by routing produce requests and consume requests without xref:develop:consume-data/follower-fetching.adoc[follower fetching] to brokers located in certain AZs.

== Prerequisites

include::shared:partial$enterprise-license.adoc[]

> You must xref:manage:rack-awareness.adoc#configure-rack-awareness[configure rack awareness] for the cluster. If the config_ref:enable_rack_awareness,true,properties/cluster-properties[] cluster configuration property is set to `false`, leadership pinning is disabled across the cluster.

Reviewer 4: "In order for leading pinning to function, rack awareness must be configured on the cluster"

== Configure leader pinning

> The following steps assume that you have Redpanda deployed in a multi-AZ setup, and you have configured each broker so that the config_ref:rack,true,properties/broker-properties[] configuration property contains rack IDs corresponding to the AZ IDs.

Reviewer 4: 'multi-AZ or multi-region cluster, and you have configured ...'

> You can set the configuration property for individual topics only, or set the cluster-wide configuration property that will enable leader pinning by default for all topics. You can also use a combination in which a default setting applies across the cluster, and you toggle the setting on or off for specific topics.

Reviewer 3: @ztlpn added this to try and address your comment [here](https://github.com/redpanda-data/docs/pull/809#discussion_r1801258743), @asimms41 would you mind helping to check that this makes sense?

Reviewer 2: The paragraph itself looks good, though shouldn't we first introduce the topic property and the cluster config property and only then talk about them? Something like, "There are two ways to configure leader pinning: ", then the detailed explanation of both, and only then this paragraph.

* Set the topic configuration property `redpanda.leaders.preference`. The property accepts the following string values:
+
--

> ** `none` (default): Opt out the topic from leader pinning.

Reviewer 2: It's not entirely accurate that `none` is the default for the topic property. Rather, the default is determined by `default_leaders_preference`.

Reviewer 2: Topic properties in kafka can be in the "not set" state

> ** `racks:<rack1>[,<rack2>,...]`: Specify the preferred location (rack) of partition leaders to brokers with rack IDs in this list. The list can contain one or more rack IDs. 

Reviewer 4: ...of all partition leaders for the topic to brokers with ..'

--
+
You can list the IDs in any order. Spaces in the list are ignored, i.e. `racks:rack1,rack2` and `racks: rack1,  rack2` are equivalent, but you cannot specify empty rack IDs, for example, `racks: rack1,,rack2`.

* Set the cluster configuration property `default_leaders_preference`. This property sets the default leader pinning configuration for all topics that don’t have `redpanda.leaders.preference` explicitly set. It accepts values in the same format as `redpanda.leaders.preference`. Default: `none` 
+

> This property also affects internal topics such as `__consumer_offsets` and transaction coordinators.

Reviewer 4: @ztlpn this is strange to me, because  even if all (or most) data  topics have producers concentrated in AZ1, it says nothing about where consumers are located and where transactions are initiated, yet we are biasing the consumer offset commit traffic to a particular AZ when one of the cases we're supporting here  where the consumers are spread but the producers are not.  Also for the topics that opt-out of this default, they surely don't want this concentration of their consumer offset traffic. This use by internal topics seems like a potential mistake or rather something we can improve

Reviewer 2: OTOH it feels wrong if in the ordinary produce path the clients will have to send requests to transaction coordinators in a different AZ and incur latency costs even though everything else is in one AZ.

> Also for the topics that opt-out of this default, they surely don't want this concentration of their consumer offset traffic.

We can't have `__consumer_offsets` leaders pinned for some data topics and and unpinned for other (in fact, one consumer offsets partition can be responsible for data partitions with differing pinning settings). So there is no perfect solution there.

Reviewer 4: Yeah,  I hear you @ztlpn . It just seems like we might want a global config for these internal topics to basically say (yes/no the bulk of all 1. transaction interaction, including participating consumers and 2. egress from consumers in general is also colocated in my preferred region.... or not, its spread).  In very many cases with fanout workloads the consumers are spread or even concentrated elsewhere, and we are of course hurting the consume side costs and latency for those user cases by forcing everything in to the leader AZ.  For the Tx especially I see your argument but its use case dependent. Maybe a follow-up item we can tackle.

ANyways @kbatuigas this one doesn't affect docs

= Leader Pinning

> :page-categories: Clients, Development

Reviewer 5: Take a look at all the Labs listed in this topic--not sure I see how they are related or if they use leader pinning. If that is the case, you can remove them by omitting the categories tag here.

Reviewer 3: @Feediver1 they're not really -- Follower fetching also has these page categories. I think these are just the labs available for the two as they are pretty broad. We don't have any for multi-AZ deployments which would be the most relevant topic. Probably better to remove.

// tag::single-source[]
:description: Learn about leader pinning and how to configure a preferred partition leader location based on cloud availability zones or regions.

> Produce requests to write data to Redpanda topics go through the topic partition leader, which syncs messages across its follower replicas. For a Redpanda cluster deployed across multiple availability zones (AZs), leader pinning ensures that a topic's partition leaders are geographically closer to clients. Leader pinning helps decrease networking costs and guarantee lower latency.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Produce requests to write data to Redpanda topics go through the topic partition leader, which syncs messages across its follower replicas. For a Redpanda cluster deployed across multiple availability zones (AZs), leader pinning ensures that a topic's partition leaders are geographically closer to clients. Leader pinning helps decrease networking costs and guarantees lower latency.
```

Reviewer 3: @asimms41 Meant for "helps" to apply to both "decrease" and "guarantee" - does that sound all right?

Reviewer 5: +1 on "guarantees"

> Produce requests to write data to Redpanda topics go through the topic partition leader, which syncs messages across its follower replicas. For a Redpanda cluster deployed across multiple availability zones (AZs), leader pinning ensures that a topic's partition leaders are geographically closer to clients. Leader pinning helps decrease networking costs and guarantee lower latency.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
Produce requests that write data to Redpanda topics go through the topic partition leader, which syncs messages across its follower replicas. For a Redpanda cluster deployed across multiple availability zones (AZs), leader pinning ensures that a topic's partition leaders are geographically closer to clients, which helps decrease networking costs and guarantees lower latency.
```

Reviewer 5: Have you added leader pinning to the glossary? For the release/GA, seems like this would be helpful to anyone just wanting a quick 2-3 sentence definition. Then you could like the first instance of it here to the glossary entry.

> Produce requests to write data to Redpanda topics go through the topic partition leader, which syncs messages across its follower replicas. For a Redpanda cluster deployed across multiple availability zones (AZs), leader pinning ensures that a topic's partition leaders are geographically closer to clients. Leader pinning can lower networking costs and help guarantee lower latency by routing produce and consume requests to brokers located in certain AZs.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Produce requests to Redpanda topics go through the topic partition leader, which syncs messages across its follower replicas. For a Redpanda cluster deployed across multiple availability zones (AZs), leader pinning ensures that a topic's partition leaders are geographically closer to clients. Leader pinning can lower networking costs and help guarantee lower latency by routing produce and consume requests to brokers located in certain AZs.
```

> Produce requests to write data to write to Redpanda topics go through the topic partition leader, which syncs messages across its follower replicas. For a Redpanda cluster deployed across multiple availability zones (AZs), leader pinning ensures that a topic's partition leaders are geographically closer to clients. Leader pinning can lower networking costs and help guarantee lower latency by routing produce and consume requests to brokers located in certain AZs.

Reviewer 4: last part of the last sentence is wrong. it doesn't route anything., if we end the sentence at 'latency' its correct.

Reviewer 4: also this isn't about consume it's about produce.  anyways if you remove everything after 'latency' it will be fine.

> 

Reviewer 4: It doesn't affect consume requests

Reviewer 2: It does for consumers that don't have follower fetching configured.

Reviewer 4: but then the consumer also has to be located in the AZ/Region where the leader is to get the benefit, which is a separate question. (where is your ingress coming from and where are your consumers/egress located). 2 independent things.

@kbatuigas  the story here is: If producers happen to be concentrated in an AZ/region, you pin the leaders to that az/region.  Separately, if the consumers happen to be located there, you get additional benefit IF follower fetching is NOT enabled.   So however we want to phrase that

> See also: xref:develop:consume-data/follower-fetching.adoc[Follower fetching] to configure consumers to fetch records from the closest replica and help reduce overall networking costs. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[Follower fetching], where consumers are configured to fetch records from the closest replica, can also help reduce overall networking costs. 
```

== Prerequisites

> include::shared:partial$enterprise-license.adoc[]

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
[NOTE]
====
include::shared:partial$enterprise-license.adoc[]
====
```

Reviewer 5: To be consistent with other topics that require an enterprise license--it's always in a note.

> xref:develop:consume-data/follower-fetching.adoc[Follower fetching], where you configure consumers to fetch records from the closest replica, can also help reduce overall networking costs. If consumers are located in the same preferred region or AZ for leader pinning, and you have not enabled follower fetching, you still see additional benefits for consume requests by enabling leader pinning.

Reviewer: I'm not sure about this and this is just a suggestion but maybe something like this. It just means that we keep talking about leader pinning throughout.

If consumers are located in the same preferred region or AZ as existing leader pinning, and you have not set up [follower fetching](xref:develop:consume-data/follower-fetching.adoc[Follower fetching]), enabling leader pinning for consume requests can also help reduce networking costs.

> To enable leader pinning, you must xref:manage:rack-awareness.adoc#configure-rack-awareness[configure rack awareness] on the cluster. If the config_ref:enable_rack_awareness,true,properties/cluster-properties[] cluster configuration property is set to `false`, leader pinning is disabled across the cluster.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
Before you can enable leader pinning, you must xref:manage:rack-awareness.adoc#configure-rack-awareness[configure rack awareness] on the cluster. If the config_ref:enable_rack_awareness,true,properties/cluster-properties[] cluster configuration property is set to `false`, leader pinning is disabled across the cluster.
```

== Configure leader pinning

> You can use a topic configuration property as well as a cluster configuration property to configure leader pinning.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
You can use either a topic configuration property or cluster configuration property to configure leader pinning.
```

Reviewer 3: @Feediver1 if combinations of topic + cluster properties can be configured (e.g. enable cluster property and leave topic property unset; enable cluster property but disable for specific topics; enable for specific topics only), is it correct to say "as well as"?

Reviewer 5: How about:
You can use both a topic and cluster configuration property to configure leader pinning.

> The following steps assume that you have Redpanda deployed in a multi-AZ setup, and you have configured each broker so that the config_ref:rack,true,properties/broker-properties[] configuration property contains rack IDs corresponding to the AZ IDs.

Reviewer: Is this a prerequisite?

Reviewer 3: @asimms41 It's part of the prereq to configure rack awareness.

> The following steps assume that you have Redpanda deployed in a multi-AZ or multi-region cluster, and you have configured each broker so that the config_ref:rack,true,properties/broker-properties[] configuration property contains rack IDs corresponding to the AZ IDs.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
The following steps are based on the assumption that you have Redpanda deployed in a multi-AZ or multi-region cluster, and you have configured each broker so that the config_ref:rack,true,properties/broker-properties[] configuration property contains rack IDs corresponding to the AZ IDs.
```

> * Set the topic configuration property `redpanda.leaders.preference`. The property accepts the following string values:

Reviewer 5: You refer to these above as steps--so shouldn't be numbered steps rather than bullets?

Reviewer 3: @Feediver1 No, users can configure the topic config property, or the cluster config property, or both. Can I just remove "The following steps"? i.e. "Assume that you have RP deployed..."

> Assume that you have Redpanda deployed in a multi-AZ or multi-region cluster, and you have configured each broker so that the config_ref:rack,true,properties/broker-properties[] configuration property contains rack IDs corresponding to the AZ IDs:

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
This configuration is based on the following scenario: you have Redpanda deployed in a multi-AZ or multi-region cluster, and you have configured each broker so that the config_ref:rack,true,properties/broker-properties[] configuration property contains rack IDs corresponding to the AZ IDs:
```

+
--
** `none`: Opt out the topic from leader pinning.
** `racks:<rack1>[,<rack2>,...]`: Specify the preferred location (rack) of all topic partition leaders to brokers with these rack IDs. The list can contain one or more rack IDs. 
--
+

> This property inherits the default value from `default_leaders_preference`.

Reviewer 5: I could not find this property anywhere. @Deflaimun Do you know if it is coming in prop updates soon?
Reason I looked was that I thought it should link to it, or state what this inherited default value is so users don't have to go look it up. One of the other of those recommended here.

Reviewer 6: New upcoming property for 24.3

```
=== default_leaders_preference

Default settings for preferred location of topic partition leaders. It can be either "none" (no preference), or "racks:<rack1>,<rack2>,..." (prefer brokers with rack id from the list).

*Requires restart:* No

*Visibility:* `user`

*Default:* ``
```

> ** `racks:<rack1>[,<rack2>,...]`: Specify the preferred location (rack) of all partition leaders for the topic to brokers with rack IDs in this list. The list can contain one or more rack IDs. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
** `racks:<rack1>[,<rack2>,...]`: Specify the preferred location (rack) of all partition leaders for the topic to brokers with rack IDs. The list can contain one or more rack IDs. 
```
Check for accuracy

+

> You can list the IDs in any order. Spaces in the list are ignored, i.e. `racks:rack1,rack2` and `racks: rack1,  rack2` are equivalent, but you cannot specify empty rack IDs, for example, `racks: rack1,,rack2`.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
You can list the IDs in any order. Spaces in the list are ignored, for example: `racks:rack1,rack2` and `racks: rack1,  rack2` are equivalent. You cannot specify empty rack IDs, for example: `racks: rack1,,rack2`.
```

> This property inherits the default value from `default_leaders_preference`.

Reviewer 6: ```suggestion
This property inherits the default value from the cluster property `default_leaders_preference`.
```

> * Set the cluster configuration property `default_leaders_preference`. This property sets the default leader pinning configuration for all topics that don’t have `redpanda.leaders.preference` explicitly set. It accepts values in the same format as `redpanda.leaders.preference`. Default: `none` 

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
* Set the cluster configuration property `default_leaders_preference`, which sets the default leader pinning configuration for all topics that don’t have `redpanda.leaders.preference` explicitly set. It accepts values in the same format as `redpanda.leaders.preference`. Default: `none` 
```

+

> This property also affects internal topics such as `__consumer_offsets` and transaction coordinators.

Reviewer 4: Actually @kbatuigas , we should probably expand on the why a bit, e.g.

"This property also affects internal topics such as `__consumer_offsets` and transaction coordinators.  This helps to additionally colocate all offset tracking and transaction coordination requests for all clients withing one or more preferred regions/AZs, providing additional E2E latency and networking cost benefits."

> ** `racks:<rack1>[,<rack2>,...]`: Specify the preferred location (rack) of all topic partition leaders. The list can contain one or more rack IDs. If you specify multiple IDs, Redpanda tries to distribute the partition leader locations equally across brokers in these racks.
> --
> +
> This property inherits the default value from the cluster property `default_leaders_preference`.
> +
> You can list the IDs in any order. Spaces in the list are ignored, for example: `racks:rack1,rack2` and `racks: rack1,  rack2` are equivalent. You cannot specify empty rack IDs, for example: `racks: rack1,,rack2`.

Reviewer 5: ```suggestion
** `racks:<rack1>[,<rack2>,...]`: Specify the preferred location (rack) of all topic partition leaders. The list can contain one or more rack IDs, and you can list the IDs in any order. Spaces in the list are ignored, for example: `racks:rack1,rack2` and `racks: rack1,  rack2` are equivalent. You cannot specify empty rack IDs, for example: `racks: rack1,,rack2`. If you specify multiple IDs, Redpanda tries to distribute the partition leader locations equally across brokers in these racks.
--
+
This property inherits the default value from the cluster property `default_leaders_preference`.
```

> This property also affects internal topics such as `__consumer_offsets` and transaction coordinators. All offset tracking and transaction coordination requests get placed within the preferred regions or AZs for all clients, so you see end-to-end latency and networking cost benefits.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This property also affects internal topics, such as `__consumer_offsets` and transaction coordinators. All offset tracking and transaction coordination requests get placed within the preferred regions or AZs for all clients, so you see end-to-end latency and networking cost benefits.
```

> You can set the configuration property for individual topics only, or set the cluster-wide configuration property that will enable leader pinning by default for all topics. You can also use a combination in which a default setting applies across the cluster, and you toggle the setting on or off for specific topics.

Reviewer 5: Seems like this should come _before_ the config settings, not at the end.

If there is more than one broker in the preferred AZ (or AZs), leader pinning distributes partition leaders uniformly across brokers in the AZ.

== Leader pinning failover across availability zones

> If there are three AZs: A, B, and C, and A becomes unavailable, the failover behavior is as follows:

Reviewer 5: Have you considered using a diagram to help illustrate this behavior? I think it would be really helpful. We can request in the Monday app and Ben Weinstein could create it.
